# Review and Limitations of Evolutionary Computation

In their 2021 paper "A biological perspective on evolutionary computation", Miikkulainen and Forrest look back on Evolutionary Computation (EC) and comment on the limitations and open problems in the field, including openendedness.

> Evolutionary computation is inspired by the mechanisms of biological evolution. [...] This paper evaluates how today’s evolutionary computation compares to biological evolution and how it may fall short.

The trust of the paper is that EC is limited and the limitations stem from the differences in EC algorithms from observed biological evolution.

They highlight three major areas where EC diverges from biological evolution:

1. Small population sizes.
2. Relatively strong selection pressure.
3. Direct (rather than indirect) phenotype to genotype mappings.

> In particular, evolutionary computation diverges from biological evolution in three key respects: it is based on small populations and strong selection; it typically uses direct genotype-to-phenotype mappings; and it does not achieve major organizational transitions.

They star with a review of evolution, distilling it down to selection, mutation, recombination, and drift.

> There is general agreement today that natural selection, mutation, recombination and random drift are the key drivers of evolution

They then focus on 6 traits or hallmarks of the biological evolution process, e.g. emergent characteristics. One of these is openendedness.

Openendedness is defined as the ability of the evolutionary process to produce creatures that increase in complexity.

The interpretation from an algorithmic perspective would be modularity, non-stationary fitness functions and an optimization process that does not converge.

> Over time, evolution has often produced organ- isms with increasing complexity, reflecting the openended nature of the evolutionary process. In computational terms, innovations in such a process become essential building blocks for future evolution, leading to nonstationary fitness landscapes and indefinitely long searches rather than rapid convergence

An example of modularity is given with the "citric acid cycle". An example of non-stationary landscapes and non-convergence is given with "niche construction".

NEAT is given as an example of openendedness in an EC algorithm, although this and other examples appear to be examples of increasing complexity only.

> An example of openendedness in EC is NEAT, which generates neural network architectures from a minimal network, that is one node connecting inputs to outputs, iteratively adding nodes and links tailored to the specific problem.

They comment that openendedness is not used much today because engineering requires solutions to specific problems. Openendedness appears to be superficially antithetical to solving engineering problems.

> Because engineering aims to solve particular problems, openended approaches are rare today.

Major transitions are listed as being related to openendedness. They might be defined as modularity in the representation that restructures the search space.

> Major transitions are one example of how biological evolution achieves openendedness. These evolutionary jumps, or transitions to a new level of organization, occurred when life progressed from replicating molecules to chromosomes, and further to cells, to plastids, to multicellularity, to eusocial societies, and to societies with language and culture.

They are clear to point out that "major transitions" are a feature that has not yet been achieved in EC and is a required signal if openendedness is truly achieved.

> Even with an explicit focus on openendedness, EC has not yet produced jumps that could be considered major transitions. [...] Computational mechanisms that discover such transitions as part of an evolutionary process would be a powerful extension of current EC. They would enable automatic discovery of complex structures and exhibit a more compelling form of openendedness than what we have today. This dimension remains a major chal- lenge and future opportunity for EC research

They later comment that the field of EC might be on the right path when it comes to openenendedness. I think they are defining the term to narrowly and therefore overestimating the progress made.

> In terms of openendedness, multi-objectivity and co-evolution, EC is on a promising path where scaling the computation, representations, and environments is likely to lead to systems that resemble biological complexity more closely.

Instead, the suggest that effort needs to be placed on representation, to paraphrase.

> ... EC falls short in other areas: neutrality and random drift, using complex genotype-to-phenotype mappings with rich environmental interactions, and achieving major transitions in organization. Biological mechanisms may need to be further elucidated and incorporated into EC before we see major transitions evolving computationally.

They are probably right. I suspect the answer lies in representation and mappings. Better choices of representation facilitate better structure and navigation of the search space. This in turn will drive high-order aspects we (and the authors) want, such as openendedness and transitions.

A major failure is the direct mapping of genotype to phenotype. The error is in requiring the engineer to design a domain-specific the mapping that encodes knowledge of the problem and solution, rather than using indirect methods.

> Second, regarding genotype-to-phenotype mappings, EC methods today succeed when the human designer can identify a genetic encoding that maps directly to phenotypic behaviour. By contrast, biological evolution uses complex indirect mappings. To take advantage of this process in EC will require designs in which genomes do not necessarily contain all of the information required to construct a solution, and instead information emerges naturally through interactions with the environment.

Bits to domain-specific solution.

No idea how this could be achieved. But if solved, it would facilitate "major transitions".

> ... we have not yet seen major transitions in EC, that is, evolved representations at new organizational levels than what was provided in the initial encoding.

We lack knowledge in this area. We don't know how biology can achieve major transitions.

> However, biological theory does not yet provide adequate guidance on how such transitions can be achieved mechanistically. Biological theory describes what these transitions are, but not how they happened, leaving many questions unanswered.

If we solve this in biology we will have a mechanism we can implement in algorithms. Combine this algorithm with vast computational capacity provided by modern systems.

A promise is that will then have an automated engine of discovery. A holy grail for computers.

> If we can meet these challenges, EC is poised to become a core innovation engine for complex engineered systems.






## References

* A biological perspective on evolutionary computation, 2021.
  <https://www.nature.com/articles/s42256-020-00278-8>

## Reading List

* The Major Transitions in Evolution, 1997.
* Toward major evolutionary transitions theory 2.0, 2015.
* Major evolutionary transitions in individuality, 2015.
* Open-ended behavioral complexity for evolved virtual creatures, 2013.
* The surprising creativity of digital evolution: a collection of anecdotes from the evolutionary computation and artificial life research communities, 2020.
* Open problems in artificial life, 2000.
* Defining and simulating open-ended novelty: requirements, guidelines, and challenges, 2016.
* Division blocks and the open-ended evolution of development, form, and behavior, 2007.
* Speciation without pre-defined fitness functions, 2015.
* Confronting the challenge of quality diversity, 2015.
* Acquiring evolvability through adaptive representations, 2007.
* Designing neural networks through evolutionary algorithms, 2019.
* Comparing direct and indirect encodings using both raw and hand-designed features in tetris, 2017.
* A survey of modularity in genetic programming, 2016.
