# We may need better definitions of diversity and complexity

Paper titled "Open-Endedness for the Sake of Open-Endedness" by Arend Hintze published in 2019.

Artificial evolution stalls unlike natural evolution.

This failure is not caused by a lack of computation resources. It is caused by a missing element in the algorithm.

> Natural evolution keeps inventing new complex and intricate forms and behaviors. Digital evolution and genetic algorithms fail to create the same kind of complexity, not just because we still lack the computational resources to rival nature, but because (it has been argued) we have not understood in principle how to create open-ended evolving systems.

An algorithm is presented that meets the definition for openendedness. It is not what we want, highlighting our definitions are not good enough.

A number of definitions are summarized, resulting in 13 points.

The general condition might be:

> “evolutionary dynamics in which new, surprising, and sometimes more complex organisms continue to appear”

Terms like diversity, complexity, and novelty are not agreed upon and not well defined. At best, they are "I know it when I see it". Agreed, this is weak.

A system is defined of organisms on a 2d plane that must navigate and be evaluated.

> Each sequence defines a path, or trajectory, through a 2D space. [...] The genetic sequence then defines a specific path. This path is evaluated to compute the fitness (the score that defines reproductive success).

Simulations were run, measures of complexity and diversity were captured.

Claims are made that the points defining open-endedness are met.

> If the definitions used here (Kolmogorov complexity and Levenshtein distances) were satisfactory, then we could consider the quest for open-ended evolution as resolved. However, quite frankly, even the author (and hopefully you the reader) is disappointed by these results.

Yet, the results are disappointing.

> Instead of calling open- endedness a solved problem, we need to focus our attention on the definitions that allowed this simple model to be sufficient. The question now becomes, how can we define complexity and diversity in such a manner that one could have rejected this model with ease?

Perhaps if we sharpen our definitions of diversity and complexity, we can determine a better definition.

> How- ever, it suggests that we as a community fail to properly define what we want to study by using the term open-ended evolution in lieu of other more specific and more productive terms. We want to create systems that are surprising, complex, and novel and that serve a scientific purpose. Our overly general definition of complexity and diversity within the requirements of open-ended evolution prevent us from achieving our goal.

The author cautions a quest for openendedness for the sake of openendedness, as the name of the paper suggests.




## References

* Open-Endedness for the Sake of Open-Endedness, 2019.
* BEACON: Study of evolution in action.
	<https://www3.beacon-center.org/>

## Selected Further Reading

* Defining and simulating open-ended novelty: Requirements, guidelines, and challenges, 2016.
* Open problems in artificial life, 2000.
* Three evolvability requirements for open-ended evolution, 2000.
* An anti-adaptationist approach to genetic algorithms, 1994.
* Abandoning objectives: Evolution through the search for novelty alone, 2011.
* Artificial evolution by viability rather than competition, 2014.
* Four steps toward open-ended evolution, 1999.
* Exploring the concept of open-ended evolution, 2012.
* Requirements for open-ended evolution in natural and artificial systems, 2015.


