# Genetic Algorithms are Robust Adaptive Systems For Sequential Decision Problems

Review of "Genetic Algorithms Are NOT Function Optimizers", published by Kennetb A. De Jong in 1993.

Genetic Algorithms or GAs have received a lot of attention as function optimizers. In John Holland's original work, GAs were proposed as an adaptive system, not necessarily as function optimizers.

> ... thee motivating context of Holland's initial GA work was the design and implementation of robust adaptive systems.

Optimization is an important field and many functions that require optimization resist classical methods.

This motivates research into robust optimization algorithms such as neural networks, genetic algorithms and evolution strategies. These algorithms have performed well.

The problem of GAs doing well on optimization problems is that they are equated with the problem, e.g. GAs are function optimizers.

> However, with all this activity, there is a tendency to equate GAs with function optimization. There is a subtle but important difference between "GAs as function optimizers" and "GAs are function optimizers".

The initial motivation for GAs was to develop robust adaptive systems. These systems could then be applied to a range of domains. Optimization is just one of those domains. As such, we may be limiting the application of the system by only focusing on function optimization.

> The algorithm in question wasn't designed to solve any particular problem (like sorting, tree traversal, or even function optimization). Rather, it is a high level simulation of a biologically motivated adaptive system, namely evolution.

If we study the emergent behavior of the GA "system", then we may better understand other problem domains where the system may be applicable.

> We would like to know what kind of emergent behavior arises from such a simple set of rules, and how changes in the algorithm affect such behavior. As we understand better the kind of adaptive behavior exhibited by GAs, we can begin to identify potential application areas that might be able to exploit such algorithms.

It is hard to analyze evolutionary adaptive behavior using high-level abstractions like GAs.

Holland's approach was to use the near-optimal allocation of trials, e.g. bandit theory.

> Honand's analysis in terms of near-optimal allocation of trials in the face of uncertainty is still today one of the few analytical characterizations we have of global GA behavior. Much of the early GA research was an attempt to gain additional insight via empirical studies in which the fitness landscape was defined by carefully chosen time-invariant memoryless functions whose surfaces were weD understood and by observing how GA populations evolved and adapted to these landscapes.

Study of GAs revealed:

1. That behavior varied widely when varying simple parameters, like population size and genetic operators.
2. There is no universal definition for one GA to be better than another (no free lunch, I guess).
3. Robust behavior is observed and GAs may be a key element in robust function optimization.

The behaviour of a simple GA can be evaluated from a few levels, such as:

* Genotypic level, e.g. bit strings.
* Phenotypic level, e.g. real values.
* Optimization level, e.g. cost function.

An alternate analysis is from the perspecive of an adaptive system.

That is, a sequential process that lacks prior knowledge and must make decisions with noisy feedback and a pay-off function.

> ... given a limited number of trials, how should one allocate them so as to maximize the cumulative payoff in the face of all of this uncertainty?

An optimal strategy must both explore and exploit. A formal analysis for such a strategy is called the Schema Theorem.

Modifications are needed to use GAs for function optimization, such as a reframing of the process, keeping the best solutions, and mapping candidates to the solution space.

Most analysis is for GAs under function optimization. The findings may not extend to GAs more generally, e.g. as an adaptive process. Specifically, a sequential decision problem.

> ... there is a tendency to assume that the theoretical and behavioral characteristics of canonical GAs are identical to those of GA-based function optimizers. This is simply not true in general.

The argument of this piece is subtle.

I wonder if anyone took up the challenge and wonder off, back into the wilderness.

## References

* Genetic Algorithms Are NOT Function Optimizers, 1993.
