# Limitations of ALife Regarding Open-ended Evolution

Emily Dolson, et al. published "What’s holding artificial life back from open-ended evolution?" in 2015.

They propose a framework for thinking about continual evolution in ALife systems.

> Here, we propose an alternate framework for thinking about these problems. By measuring obstacles to continued innovation, we can move towards a mechanistic understanding of what drives various evolutionary dynamics. We propose that this framework will allow for more rigorous hypothesis testing and clearer applications of these concepts to evolutionary computation.

The problem of open-ended evolution is described succinctly:

> organisms and ecosystems in computational evolutionary systems were far less diverse, complex, and interesting than those that seen in nature.

In layman's terms, what stops these systems from continually evolving interesting things?

Maybe the scale of the systems is too low. Maybe there is something missing in the design of the systems.

The authors propose changing the question to:

> When are we sure that a system is not open-ended? If a system isn’t open-ended, it must be getting stuck somehow.

The list a number of characteristic that we could observe to indicate that open-endedness was not achieved.

1. The population stops changing
2. Novel organisms stop appearing
3. Organismal complexity stops increasing
4. Ecosystem diversity stagnates
5. Shifts in individuality are impossible

We may have made some progress in some areas, such as with "change" and "novelty" (the first two points in the list).

> For example, the change barrier has long plagued evolutionary algorithms and is now well understood. Because of the resulting research, we have a variety of diversity maintenance techniques that can generally overcome this barrier (demonstrated in Figures 1 and 2). Similarly, novelty search has made great strides toward overcoming the novelty barrier (Lehman and Stanley, 2008).

The above characteristics are not binary, rather attractors or gradients where systems get stuck. Different techniques will offer different capability profiles. This is important to keep in mind. We are not seeking a panacea. More likely an conglomeration of hacks.

They also comment that each of the five aspects have relationships.

Change potential is required for novelty potential. Novelty potential is required for complexity and ecological potential, both of which are required for transition potential. They have a diagram to summarize all of this.

Once these aspects are identified, the goal is to develop metrics to measure each, then start applying the measure to actual systems.

> Our goal with these four complexity barriers is to provide metrics that can be rigorously mathematically tested in a broad range of systems.

There are then public comments from reviewers.

> ALifers might want to consider that their task is not only to describe 'life as it is' and 'life as it could be'..., but also life as it couldn't be--and to explain why." The current paper can be seen as a step in that direction.



## Further Reading

* What’s holding artificial life back from open-ended evolution?, 2015.
	<https://thewinnower.com/papers/2309-what-s-holding-artificial-life-back-from-open-ended-evolution>
* Open-ended evolution: Perspectives from the OEE workshop in York, 2016.
* An overview of open-ended evolution: Editorial introduction to the open-ended evolution ii special issue, 2019.
* Talk, OEE1 Workshop (Session 1, 20 July 2015) video recording (Part 4/5), 2015.
	<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vTV7SJUOzzQ&t=1366s&ab_channel=ECAL2015>
* A comparison of evolutionary activity in artificial evolving systems and in the biosphere, 1997.
* Open problems in artificial life, 2000.

