# Overview of Open-Ended Evolution

The 2019 paper "An Overview of Open-Ended Evolution" provides an overview of Open-Ended Evolution (OOE) as introduced in the "2018 Conference on Artificial Life in Tokyo".

We don't understand how the process of evolution leads to the diversity of life. We cannot reproduce the effect in our artificial systems.

> Decades of research have explored evolutionary algorithms of various sorts, but so far a full understanding of the creative productivity of evolution (biological or non-biological) has remained out of reach, with regard to both under- standing how it has worked to produce the biosphere, and understanding what principles might be used or instantiated outside of biology (the purview of artificial life) to achieve comparable levels of creative productivity.

Evolution is an on-going process that we call "openended". We study this characteristic int he field of "openended evolution".

> As far as we know, the same physical, chemical, and biological mechanisms remain at work now as they have in the past, leading most scientists to believe that biological evolution is open-ended. This has historically led us to call the study of the creative production of ongoing novelty open-ended evolution.

The characteristic is more general than evolution. Exists in other domains, such as culture and technology.

Central to the concept is the study of innovations created by the process, e.g. efficiency innovations and niche innovations.

> Hochberg et al. go on to distinguish between performance innovations that lead to efficiency improvements but do not fundamentally change an organismʼs ecological niche, and niche innovations involving the utilization of a new niche and creating opportunities for adaptive radiation.

A goal of the field is to understand if and when innovations are limited in an openended system.

The York workshop proposed different categories of OEE, they are:

1. Ongoing generation of adaptive novelty
	a) Ongoing generation of new adaptations
	b) Ongoing generation of new kinds of entities
	c) Emergence of major transitions
	d) Evolution of evolvability
2. Ongoing growth of complexity
	a) Ongoing growth of entity complexity
	b) Ongoing growth of interaction complexity

The Tokyo reformulation of these categories is as follows:

1. Interesting new kids of entities and interactions
2. Evolution of evolvability
3. Major transitions
4. Semantic evolution

They appear more opaque.

Perhaps more as an organizing structure for the conference than properties of systems.

Evolving new kinds of entities and interactions is classical evolutionary algorithms and extensions.

We still want things from this area, such as evolving hierarchically modular entities.

> Biological systems display emergence of even more elaborate hierarchies, with molecular entities forming cells, cells forming organisms, organisms forming ecologies, and so on. Emergence of rich hierarchical structure is one concrete example of interesting new entities and interactions, and is a “holy grail” for ALife models.

Evolution of evolvability may have focused on the evolution of evolutionary operators.

> Taylorʼs contribution addresses a form of evolution of evolvability, when he considers the implementation of intrinsically coded evolvable genetic operators. In systems where the evolutionary process is implemented in this way, “not only might the process evolve, but the evolvability of the process might itself evolve”

Major transitions might be hierarchical modularity to the extreme.

> Major transitions are characterized by an emergent hierarchy, with each new level in the hierarchy consisting of a new population of reproducing and evolving entities—thus a particular kind of dynamical hierarchy.

Semantic evolution is some notion of the evolution of meaning.

Openendedness remains out of reach.

> The degree of open-endedness displayed by biological evolution remains out of reach of todayʼs ALife models, and we donʼt understand the mechanisms behind OEE well enough to engineer systems that display that degree of open-endedness.

Progress is claimed. It's hard to see.

It's challenging to point at a system and declare it does "openendedness".

This paper was more a categorization and summary of a workshop.

## References

* An Overview of Open-Ended Evolution: Editorial Introduction to the Open-Ended Evolution II Special Issue, 2019.
	<https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.04430>

## Further Reading

* Process and pattern in innovations from cells to societies.
* The exploration/exploitation tradeoff in dynamic cellular genetic algorithms, 2005.
* Defining and simulating open-ended novelty: Requirements, guidelines, and challenges, 2016.
* On the potential for open-endedness in neural networks, 2019.
* Cognition is not computation: Evolution is not optimisation, 1997.
* Open-endedness for the sake of open-endedness, 2019.
* Abandoning objectives: Evolution through the search for novelty alone, 2011.
* Evolved open-endedness, not open-ended evolution, 2019.
* Is evolvability evolvable?, 2008.
* Two modes of evolution: Optimization and expansion, 2019.
* Evolvability reconsidered, 2011.
* Open-ended evolution: Perspectives from the OEE workshop in York, 2016.


