# Framework for Openendedness in Evolutionary Systems

Tim Taylor in is 2018 paper "Evolutionary Innovations and Where to Find Them" provides a framework for developing openendedness in evolutionary systems.

	This paper presents a high-level conceptual framework to help orient the discussion and implementation of open-endedness in evolutionary systems.

State-space is used as a concept for defining the set of possible representations for a genotype or phenotype. A simplification of fitness landscape that discards fitness.

	The idea of a possibility space or state space to represent the range of all possible forms of an individual in an evolutionary system is a widely employed concept (e.g. [12, 5, 1]). Indeed, they are simplifications of the the concept of adaptive landscapes first proposed by Sewall Wright (for genotypes) in 1932 and by G.G. Simpson (for phenotypes) in 1944 [14].

The challenge of this metaphor is that we probably cannot identify and quantify all of the dimensions of the space that can be varied.

Banzhaf, et al.'s description of the three kids of novelty is introduced and adopted as a starting point.

An openended evolutionary system must demonstrate ongoing adaptive novelty, Not just novelty, but "adaptive novelty" because the context is evolution.

	As discussed in previous OEE Workshops, one of the most general and widely accepted hall- marks of open-ended evolution is the presence of ongoing adaptive novelty [38]. The three different kinds of novelty therefore give rise to three different kinds of open-endedness.

Each level of novelty in the framework may then permit different types of openendedness:

1. Exploratory openendedness (variation within the model)
2. Expansive openendedness (variation across models)
3. Transformational openendedness (variation across meta-models)

The first level might be thought of as change within species.

	Potential examples from biology include the production of a new combination of alleles on a genome, and a change in the number of vertebra in a new vertebrate species.

The second level might be thought of as the branching off of a new species.

	Potential examples from biology include synthesis of a new chemical species that has not been used in previous metabolic reactions, and the introduction of a new species of an existing genus that can occupy a new ecological niche.

The third level might be thought of as a "major transition", like multicellularity, walking on land, winged flight, and so on.

	Potential examples from biology include a major transition in individuality [25], the appearance of winged flight, and the appearance of visual sensory systems.

The discussion continues by looking at a mapping from genotypic space to phenotypic space and changes to each space and the mappings.

The three core principles of an evolutionary system are summarized as:

1. Generation of phenotypic individuals from genotype descriptions.
2. Evaluation of phenotypes for reproduction.
3. Reproduction of selected phenotypes with variation.

Each step is formalized with some mathematical notation.

The formalism provides the basis of analyzing the effect that each term and equation has in illiciting openendedness, or perhaps the effect that that openendedness must have on each term or equation.

Parts of the formalism could be implemented implicitly, e.g. as part of the individual's mapping, rather than being hard coded and extrinsic.

An implicit implementation would allow the generation, evaluation, and selection operators may then be subject to change.

	Here I consider the benefits of implicit implementations not just of the evaluation process, but also of the generation and reproduction processes. The key benefit of processes instantiated intrinsically by being explicitly implemented within the system itself is that it allows the possibility that the implementation—the process—can itself change

This might facilitate a movement from level-1 to level-2 or to achieve both simultaneously.

Allowing reproduction operators to be subject to evolution is connected to ideas of evolvability and the evolution of evolvability.

	Route 1 represents topics in the literature concerning the evolution of evolvability (evo-evo), such as evolvable genetic operators, including copying processes, error correction, mutator genes for guided mutations, crossover mechanisms, gross chromosomal rearrangements, horizontal gene transfer, etc.

Allowing mappings to be subject to evolution is connected to ideas of evolutionary development.

	Implementing the G-P map intrinsically potentially allows it to evolve such that mutations are more likely to produce adaptive variations in P-space. Route 3 represents topics in the literature such as evo-devo, facilitated variation and developmental robustness

Individuals can interact with the environment that influences the evaluation of reproductive fitness. Perhaps related to niche creation, or not.

	An alternative possibility for an organism to influence the result of the G-P mapping process is for it to exert some control over the environmental conditions under which the process occurs (in the case where the mapping is sensitive to such conditions)

The environment too must be dynamic and subject to change, driving exploration in phenotypic space.

Many more examples are given, all relating to the diagram (figure 4) that captures the formalism and influences upon it and their suggested effects.

	To summarise the preceding discussion, the routes to open-endedness depicted in Figure 4 represent mechanisms by which organisms can promote ongoing evolutionary activity by modifying the adaptive landscape, the topology of genetic space, or the nature of the G-P map.

It's a great start.

The limitation is that phenotypic space cannot be extended. At least that is the claim. Is it true?

The environment must be rich enough to support and promote a vast phenotypic space. Perhaps most environments (fitness functions) are not rich enough.

	In the case of computational evolutionary systems, the same solution of providing a world with rich possibilities for complexity in its laws of dynamics and interactions is also an option. It is notable that most existing ALife work with computational evolution takes place in very impoverished virtual environments.

Natural systems have many areas of physical variation in phenotypic space. Perhaps this is required.

	Components in physical systems possess multiple properties in different domains (e.g. mechanical, chemical, electrical, responsiveness to electromagnetism, pressure, etc.). [...] Most computational evolutionary systems lack significantly multi-property components, and therefore miss out on this route to transformational novelty.

Natural systems also have multiple levels of construction in mapping from genotypic information descriptions to phenotypic individuals in the environment. Perhaps these multiple levels of construction are required.

Construction systems could be defined as additive and non-additive compositional systems.

	We can distinguish between additive compositional systems and non-additive compositional sys- tems. For additive systems, the functionality of the resulting product is an amplification of the existing function of the components (e.g. joining a number of batteries in serial to create a new battery with a greater voltage). For non-additive systems, the act of composition can introduce new functionality depending upon the specific arrangement and connections be- tween the parts (e.g. composing a computer algorithm out of a specific set of subroutines and individual instructions).

This is the choice of a system that facilitates the evolution of complexity.

	... compositional systems able to cumulatively produce hierarchical organisations are particularly suitable as a basis for the evolution of complexity [34]. Increases in complexity in these cases will be aided by the usual drivers of complexity discussed in the evolutionary biology literature, such as co-evolutionary arms races [40].


## References

* Evolutionary Innovations and Where to Find Them: Routes to Open-Ended Evolution in Natural and Artificial Systems, 2018.
<https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.01883>

## Selected Further Reading

* Defining and simulating open-ended novelty: requirements, guidelines, and challenges, 2016.
* Unbounded evolutionary dynamics in a system of agents that actively process and
transform their environment, 2006.
* The evolution of evolvability, 1988.
* Grand views of evolution, 2017.
* Abandoning objectives: Evolution through the search for novelty alone, 2011.
* The Major Transitions in Evolution, 1995.
* Niche Construction: The Neglected Process in Evolution, 2003.
* Intrinsic adaptation in a simple model for evolution, 1988.
* Is evolvability evolvable?, 2008.
* Open-endedness: The last grand challenge you’ve never heard of, 2017.
* Creativity in evolution: Individuals, interactions and environments., 2001.
* Open-ended evolution: Perspectives from the OEE workshop in York., 2016.
* Evolutionary innovations and novelties: Let us get down to business!, 2015.


