# Cumulative and Average Evolutionary Activity

Paper published in 1997 by Mark Bedau, et al. titled "A Comparison of Evolutionary Activity in Artificial Evolving Systems and in the Biosphere".

The propose two metrics to quantify adaptive systems, cumulative and average evolutionary activity. The metrics are applied to artificial and natural systems, showing continued activity in nature but not in artificial systems.

	The third conclusion is quantitative evidence that the artificial evolving systems are qualitatively different from the biosphere.

There are increasing trends in evolution, such as transitions, diversity, "taxonomic survivorship", complexity and other aspects. Perhaps adaptation is a trend as well, e.g. fit to the changing environment.

The authors only focus on the trend of adaptation.

	Our concern in this paper is with trends involving adaptation rather than complexity, and our primary aim is to make a quantitative comparison of such trends in model systems and in the biosphere.

A population adapts by generating innovations that persist and confer survival.

	The idea of evolutionary activity is to identify innovations that make a difference. Generally we consider an innovation to "make a difference" if it persists and continues to be used.

The definition of an innovation and its contribution to survival is challenging, perhaps even subjective.

Metrics of evolutionary activity are defined in a way that they can be sampled instantaneously, e.g. each iteration of a system.

- Cumulative Evolutionary Activity.
- Average Evolutionary Activity.
- Diversity.

Two evolutionary systems are defined, Evita and Bugs.

Evita is a system of string of code.

	The Evita model is a limited-interaction system consisting of self-replicating strings of code, akin to Tierra and Avida.

Bugs is a multiagent system.

	The Bugs model consist of many agents that exist in a spatial grid, sensing the resources in their local environment, moving as a function of what they sense, ingesting the resources they find, and reproducing or dying as a function of their internal resource levels.

A record of fossil data is also described as a third system.

	The fossil data sets indicate the geological stages or epochs with the first and last appearance of taxonomic families.

Plots of all 3 metrics are shown for all 3 systems, then analyzed and compared.

Three main conclusions are drawn:

1. Cumulative evolutionary activity captures the "continual adaptive success" of a system.
2. All three metrics allow natural and artificial systems to be compared.
3. Long-term adaptation is shown in the natural system but not the artificial systems.

Only point 3 is interesting and depends on a lot, not least the choice of systems to compare and the choice of how adaptations are assessed. Also the time scales.

	Our statistics show that the Evita and Bugs models do not show comparable evolutionary activity to the evolutionary activity of the biosphere indicated in the fossil record.

They generalize and suggest that no artificial system has the adaptive capability of the biosphere.

	We suspect that no existing artificial system is qualitatively like the biosphere. If this is right, then an objective of the first importance is to devise an artificial model that captures the qualitative behavior of the biosphere.

They comment that perhaps this is due to the lack of interesting interactions between population members, like predator-prey, cooperation, communication, and similar dynamics. Also the temporal and spatial scale is vastly smaller in the artificial systems.

The comment that the environment must expose new resources and new niches as species create new niches. A type of recursive niche creation. Artificial systems don't do this perhaps due to the lack of complexity in their environments.

	In fact, organisms occupying new niches seem to create the possibility for yet newer niches; i.e., the space of innovations available to evolution is constantly growing. We believe that this aspect of biological evolution is the most important aspect missing from artificial models; simply increasing resources to the artificial models studied here does not seem to significantly affect observed patterns of evolution.

I like the approach.

I'd prefer a comparison between evolution in a controlled environment (petri dish?) to an artificial system that seeks something similar. May not be tractable.

I wonder. Can a real vector, bitstring, or sodarace world ever be rich enough to elicit the desired dynamics? I'd like to think so. Perhaps with an added dynamic evaluation and resource utilization components.



## Further Reading

* A Comparison of Evolutionary Activity in Artificial Evolving Systems and in the Biosphere, 1997.
* Adaptive diversity dynamics in static resource models, 1995.
* Dynamics of diversity in an evolving population, 1992.
* Evolutionary Trends (book), 1990.




