# Open-endedness Grand Challenge

Article on openendedness in O'Reilly Radar, popular tech news, by Stanley, et al titled "Open-endedness: The last grand challenge you’ve never heard of.

It provides good copy on the relevance and importance of the problem to a lay technical audience.


AI is a grand challenge for computer science.

Openendedness is a grand challenge that few know about but could radically impact civilization.

> What’s unusual, though, is for there to be a problem whose solution could radically alter our civilization and our understanding of ourselves while being known only to the smallest sliver of researchers. Despite how strangely implausible that sounds, it is precisely the scenario today with the challenge of open-endedness.

The problem is we don't know how a single cell evolved to provide the full diversity of life we see today. We know it happened and we know the high-process. But we don't know the mechanism by which large transitions were acquired.

> To the challenge: the first life form, likely something resembling a single prokaryotic cell, emerged billions of years ago. Though we do not know the full story of its origin, we do know that over the next few billion years, somehow this humble cell radiated into the full diversity of life on Earth we appreciate today.

There are pieces missing from the story that we must know so we can implement the algorithm.

> Think about it computationally—evolution on Earth is like a single run of a single algorithm that invented all of nature.

Our algorithms cannot do what evolution did. Our algorithms converge. They do not run forever and continually generate new things.

> If we run a machine learning algorithm today, we’re happy if it gives us a single solution, or maybe a few, but then it's over—the problem is either solved or not, and the program is finished. But evolution on Earth is amazingly different—it never seems to end.

Evolution is the never-ending algorithm.

> ... we call it evolution, but it’s also the never-ending algorithm, a process that tirelessly invents ever-greater complexity and novelty across incomprehensible spans of time.

We refer to this process of never-ending invention as open-endedness.

It is a great unsolved problem in modern science. A massive claim.

> The presence of open-endedness in nature is among the greatest mysteries of modern science, though it receives surprisingly little attention.

Openendedness in evolution is taken for granted, but we don't know how it is achieved.

It seems straightforward, but we have not achieved it in our algorithms.

> We might think we know the ingredients of evolution on Earth, and we might try to formalize them into an algorithm (often called an “evolutionary algorithm”), but, to date, no such algorithm suggests even a hint of the endless, prolific creative potential of natural evolution.

The field of ALife is well aware of this problem.

> ... there is a small community of scientists within the research field called artificial life (or “alife,” for short) that has recognized and studied this puzzle for the last two or three decades

Even our algorithms that explicitly try to explore run out of search space.

> Most EAs run for a short time, maybe of couple days, and converge to a solution, in the ideal case, or otherwise get stuck. Even the most sophisticated EAs, even ones focused on creative divergence, run out of steam pretty fast, eventually exhausting their search space of anything new.

We like EAs because their inspiration, evolution, invented all of nature. We want to harness this power in computers. This is different to simply developing a new or better optimizer.

> Evolution serves as inspiration for algorithms in computer science not because it is a great optimizer for a particular problem, but because it invented all of nature. Nothing in machine learning comes close to that ...

A pictured is painted of automated creativity and automated invention.

Openendedness may also be a path to AI, e.g. AGI.

It may be the the case that defining an evolutionary process to elicit a complex artifact may be simpler than developing the artifact ourselves. Than engineering. Evolution as engineering. I guess this assumes that the openendedness can be directed, which might be antithetical.

> ... while the multi-trillion-connection brain is a product of natural evolution, it is possible that the process of evolution itself is simpler to describe or implement.

We might need a whole new view on evolution in order to derive an openended algorithm.

> The whole story about selection, survival, fitness, competition, adaptation—it’s all very compelling and illuminating for analysis, but it’s a poor fit for synthesis: it doesn’t tell us how to actually write the process as a working open-ended algorithm. To pinpoint the reason we see open-endedness in nature (and hence become able to write an algorithm with analogous power) likely requires a radically different evolutionary narrative than we’re used to.

Openendedness is not limited to evolution.

The brain may also be capable of this process.

Discussion then moves to a history of openendedness in the literature.

Writing an algorithm for openendedness is about seeking an explosion of complexity, not about solving a problem.

> ... they hope to observe a kind of complexity explosion, where evolving artifacts diversify into ever-more intricate and inventive forms.

We need to tie down good measures and definitions for openendedness. It may involve observed increases in complexity and/or novelty.

Openendedness is also not a binary, but a gradient.

A problem is that a definition of novelty or complexity may require subjective judgement. It is novel or complex compared to something or in the context of something, like problems or an environment.

They touch on novelty search.

Novelty search perhaps lead to the field of quality diversity algorithms.

Still, these algorithms eventually stop producing results once the search space is exhausted.

> While certainly they mark some progress in our understanding, they are still missing a key ingredient of open-endedness—they are destined to stop producing anything interesting within days of launching, and there’s nothing we can do about it.

These algorithms generate novel solutions for an existing problem, but don't define new problems.

> Novelty search and QD only really address finding new solutions to existing challenges open-endedly, but they don’t inherently generate new kinds of challenges to be solved. The most powerful open-ended system would generate both.

Need to change the problem as part of searching for solutions, or to coevolve with another species, both of which are changed from the interactions.

Conditions are described that might be used to define the rules for an openended simulation.

Openendedness is practical. It may be used or needed in some domains that require creativity.

It may also be one or "the" path to AI.

Call to arms.


## Further Reading

* Open-endedness: The last grand challenge you’ve never heard of, 2017.
	<https://www.oreilly.com/radar/open-endedness-the-last-grand-challenge-youve-never-heard-of/>
* Open-endedness: A new grand challenge for AI, 2019.
	<https://conferences.oreilly.com/artificial-intelligence/ai-ca-2019/public/schedule/detail/79276.html>
* Open-endedness: A new grand challenge for AI - Kenneth Stanley (University of Central Florida), 2019.
	<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OLi0eIdyQU4&ab_channel=O%27Reilly>
* What’s holding artificial life back from open-ended evolution?, 2015.
	<https://thewinnower.com/papers/2309-what-s-holding-artificial-life-back-from-open-ended-evolution>
* The Novelty Search Users Page
	<http://eplex.cs.ucf.edu/noveltysearch/userspage/>
* Waddington's Paradigm for an Evolutionary Process
	<http://archive.tim-taylor.com/papers/thesis/html/node177.html>
* Paradigm for an Evolutionary Process, 2008.
	<https://link.springer.com/article/10.1162/biot.2008.3.3.258>



