# Modeling and Measuring Openendedness

Developing openended systems are a goal in the field of ALife and has not yet been achieved.

Susan Stepney defines the what an openended system is, how to model them, and how to measure openendedness in her 2021 paper titled "Modelling and measuring open-endedness".

> Generating open-ended (OE) systems is a major and as yet unachieved goal of ALife research. Here I discuss aspects of defining, modelling, and measuring OE. I apply a simple model of OE to itself, thereby expanding the concept, to demonstrate how truly open and vast open-endedness is.

A definition for openendedness is a continual stream of novelty, perhaps even innovation (step changes or transitions).

> One approach to defining OE is in terms of the production of a continual stream of novelty [...]. Novelty is something not seen before, or some- thing unexpected from current trends; so it must be defined with respect to (a model of) what has been seen before, and what is expected.

A definition of novety is reviewed that includes three levels, they are:

1. Variation: within model novelty
2. Innovation: change of model novelty
3. Emergence: change of meta-model novelty

An openended system must demonstrate at least continual "innovation", not just "variation". I guess a random system is the former, evolution by natural selection does the latter and more.

> They define three types of novelty: type-0 novelty, variation, as novelty within the model (such as new instances of a given type); type-1 novelty, innovation, as novelty that changes the model (such as speciation, new types of instances or behaviours); and type-2 novelty, emergence, as novelty that changes the meta-model (new concepts needed to define the model, such as a major transition).

Other names for these types of novelty are discussed, including exploratory, expansive, and transformational; novelty.

Variation is rather straightforward, variations on the theme or on the existing model.

> Exploration within such spaces finds ‘more of the same’, variations on a theme.

Innovation is more interesting. The model is changed. A border may be crossed. This is in response to a change in the state space or landscape. Perhaps a change to the environment that forces a change in the organism, when describing evolution. An adaptation.

> Innovation is a change in the state space or landscape that necessitates a change to the model of the system.

Transformation might be a replacement of the state space or landscape. It requires a new model to operate in the new domain.

> This new domain cannot be modelled with existing concepts; the whole landscape is transformed in previously unrecognisable ways.

The discussion goes on to describe thoughts from the literature on the transitions between these levels of novelty. There does not appear to be much theory or consensus on the mechanism of transition.

The environment is critical and it must be complex to provide a context for the adaptation. The source of the need for novelty.

> This implies the need for a great deal of complexity in the environment. Taylor (2019) also points out the crucial role of a complex environment, exploitable and modifiable by the individuals.

Entities require complexity. Entities should not be created or act directly, the must be the consequence of executing code.

> This need for code change to capture emergent behaviours implies that the entities in the simulation should not be simple structures (as in typical agent based simulations), but should be the consequences of executing code.

This is so that the code can capture emergent novelty. This is an argument about the need for an indirect mapping from the genotype to the phenotype, the thing that is varied and the thing that is selected.

> ... requires self-modifying code: new code to somehow incorporate and exploit the new novelties.

A number of candidate modeling systems are then summarized.

The discussion then moves on to measures of openendedness. That is, measures that capture the amount of openendedness present in a system.

I suspect the concept is too high-level to measure. Like the amount of evolvability or adaptability. It is emergent.

Diversity and complexity might be good surrogates, but may be limited to in-model rather than across-model measurements, let alone across meta-models.

An initial but challenging framework is defined that model and measures are expected to address.

> Such a system should at least include:
> * a definition of the model of OE, with evidence it is open at all levels
> * a definition of the measures in the context of that model, and a justification of how they capture OE properties
> * measures of phenotypic structure and dynamics, not of genomes
> * measures as a function of system size
> * measures that indicate when the model needs to change/has changed, such as phase transitions and divergences
> * measures of model and meta-model variation
> * computable measures
> * mechanisms to change the models (preferably intrinsically, but at least extrinsically) and associated measures
> * individuals (and environments) whose measured properties depend on executing and changeable code

Could we even address these points for a natural openended system? I suspect not or not easily.

I'd like more concrete examples of each level of novelty described above, either artificial (sequences of characters) or natural (a specific species and ecosystem).



## References

* Modelling and measuring open-endedness, 2021.
<https://www-users.york.ac.uk/~ss44/bib/ss/nonstd/oee4.htm>


## Further Reading

* Defining and simulating open-ended novelty: Requirements, guidelines, and challenges, 2016.
* Open problems in artificial life, 2000.
* Open-Endedness for the Sake of Open-Endedness, 2019.
* Exploiting open-endedness to solve problems through the search for novelty, 2008.
* An Overview of Open-Ended Evolution: Editorial Introduction to the Open-Ended Evolution II Special Issue, 2019.
* Reflecting on open-ended evolution (2011).
* Evolutionary Innovations and Where to Find Them: Routes to Open-Ended Evolution in Natural and Artificial Systems, 2019.
* Open-Ended Evolution: Perspectives from the OEE Workshop in York, 2016.





