# Neural nets as dynamical systems and genetic algorithms as systems of adaptation

Taking a look at "Cognition is not computation: Evolution is not optimisation" published by Inman Harvey in 1997.

The focus is on reframing neural nets and genetic algorithms in evolutionary robotics.

The reframing has to do with moving away from neural nets purely for cognition and genetic algorithms for optimization.

> ... the long term future of Evolutionary Robotics lies in a much more radical agendaô° that the cognition we wish autonomous agents to have has nothing to do with computation (even with neural nets) and that evolution (even artificial evolution) can be taken out of the narrow shortsighted framework of optimisation.

Brains do computation like turning machines. The word "computation" is wrong in this context. They don't "compute".

> The brain is not doing any computations at all in the sense spelt out above There is a regrettably tendency to use the word computation to refer to the workings of any complex system but this results in the word losing any useful sense, and such silly claims as a thunderstorm or indeed the universe is computing its next state.

Cognition is not "done" by the brain. It arises from the interaction of organism with environment. That is, the interaction of two dynamical systems.

> This is the "dynamical systems view of cognition", dating from the early cyberneticists and reemerging in recent years

Neural nets can be seen as a type of dynamical system. Perhaps implemented using dynamic and recurrent neural nets.

These are very challenging networks to train and use. May need to use evolutionary systems.

> DRNNs can of course have plastic behaviour at many different timescales, and hence agents built out of them can display learning behaviour; but if an evolutionary approach is used for the design of systems that behave in desired ways then "ability to learn in particular contexts" is just another constraint on the evaluation function, and need not be treated differently.

Genetic algorithms are used for optimization in high-dimensional search spaces when little is known about the domain.

Some problems should not be treated as optimization, such as many robotics problems.

In natural evolution, problems are not pre-defined. Instead, natural evolution is a system of adaptation.

> Natural evolution can b e thought of as a method for adaptive incremental improvement to organisms who are facing, over geological time, problems that vary with the environment which significantly includes other varying organisms.

Some problems should take the adaptive-improvement aspect of evolution, instead of optimization.

The different to be is subtle. An incremental adaptation is a one or few step optimization. They are the same kind, perhaps different in scale.

> ... but there is a broad class of problems where we should be looking for the adaptive-improving properties of evolution rather than optimisation properties.

No need to start from scratch from a different but related problem in engineering, when using an artificial evolutionary process.

> So the longterm future of evolutionary robotics is in incremental evolution rather than GAs-as-optimisers.

Treating a GA as a system of adaptation is different, requiring a difference in configuration. It may lead to a difference in operation, e.g. long running.

> ... in this alternative paradigm a population which may be many orders of magnitude smaller evolves for many thousands of generations, indeed in principle indefinitely.


## Reference

* Cognition is not computation: Evolution is not optimisation, 1997.
* Inman Harvey, Wikipedia.
 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inman_Harvey>

## Further Reading

* Evolving a Conscious Machine, 1998.
* Genetic algorithms are NOT function optimizers, 1993.