# Openendedness is part of the roadmap to a new automated computational scientific method

Alexander Lavin, et al. published a paper that outlines a path to combining scientific computing, simulation and AI titled "Simulation Intelligence".

> We present the "Nine Motifs of Simulation Intelligence", a roadmap for the development and integration of the essential algorithms necessary for a merger of scientific computing, scientific simulation, and artificial intelligence. We call this merger simulation intelligence (SI), for short.

One of the nine layers of their roadmap is level 8 called "open-ended optimization".

The section of this paper on open-endedness provides a useful and up-to-date summary of the field.

Open-endedness is defined as a search that continues to produce novelty or increases in complexity.

> Open-endedness, or open-ended search, can be defined as any algorithm that can consistently produce novelty or increases in complexity in its outputs. Such open-endedness is a ubiquitous feature of biological, techno-social, cultural, and many other complex systems

It is defined as an open problem as we don't have complete algorithms that can achieve the desired result.

It is contrasted to other types of search and optimization that converge on a solution, then fail to improve beyond that point.

> Open-ended learning algorithms are in general those with characteristics of life-long learning: adaptively and continually pose new objectives, adapt to environment changes, and avoid pitfalls such as local minima, deceptive loss functions, or catastrophic forgetting.

Systems of open-endedness are divided into two types, those that run forever and those that have no goals.

> In general at least two major kinds of open-endedness can be distinguished: (1) processes that do not stop, and (2) processes that do not have specific objectives.

A number of examples of open-endedness algorithms are described, including:

- Randomness and optimization
- Deceptive objectives and novelty search
- Curiosity and self-training artificial systems
- Quality-diversity and robustness to unknown in robotic systems
- Robotic systems for scientific discovery
- Lifelong machine learning and efficient memory

These are interesting areas, although limited as many method still converge or require objectives.

> Curiosity, novelty, QD, and even memory augmentation algorithms are in practice quite limited in the kinds of complexity they generate, and all converge rather quickly such that complexity generation will plateau and then end.

The authors highlight that we are missing something fundamental.

> We seem to be missing some central insight(s); this is a ripe area for extending the domain of artificial intelligence, where complexity sciences will have significant roles to play.

They note that ALife researchers are encountering the same challenge, and they too have not yet solved it.

> A central unmet goal of ALife research has been to uncover the algorithm(s) needed to consistently generate complexity, and novelty, consistent with natural evolution. Discovering and developing these algorithms would have significant implications in open-endedness and artificial intelligence broadly.

They comment that an appropriate algorithm would be able to address optimization problems, and also propose new optimization problems. Perhaps they mean facilitate, open-up or reach new problems or problem spaces.

> In the context of simulation more generally, a fully implemented open-ended system would mean not only solving optimization problems as posed by practitioners, but also posing new questions or approaches for practitioners to themselves consider. We believe this would be revolutionary


## References

* Simulation Intelligence: Towards a New Generation of Scientific Methods
https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.03235

